Title: SaliMory: Orchestrating Cognitive Memory for Conversational Agents

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.04120v1

Published Time: Thu, 04 Jun 2026 00:09:13 GMT

Number of Pages: 19

Markdown Content:
# SaliMory: Orchestrating Cognitive Memory for Conversational Agents 

Kai Zhang † , Xinyuan Zhang † , Hongda Jiang , Shiun-Zu Kuo , Hyokun Yun , Ejaz Ahmed , Shereen Oraby ,

Ziyun Li , Sanat Sharma , Ann Lee , Ahmed Aly , Anuj Kumar , Raffay Hamid , Xin Luna Dong †

Meta Reality Labs Conversational agents that serve as lifelong companions must maintain persistent memory across all interactions. However, simply expanding context windows with raw retrieval degrades reasoning quality, while training memory agents via standard reinforcement learning creates a severe credit assignment bottleneck in a multi-stage pipeline. To solve this, we introduce SaliMory , a framework that trains a single language model to manage a cognitively-structured memory—spanning user facts, preferences, and working memory. By introducing a hierarchical stage-wise process reward and reward-decomposed contrastive refinement, SaliMory provides isolated supervision for distinct memory operations (selective filtering, consolidation, and cue-driven recall) end-to-end. SaliMory cuts memory-attributed failures by one-third, outperforms the state-of-the-art by over 10% in end-to-end accuracy, and more than doubles the Good Personalization rate.  

> Correspondence: †

{kkaizh,dylanz426,lunadong}@meta.com  

> Code:

https://github.com/facebookresearch/SaliMory (To be released) 

## 1 Introduction  

> Figure 1 Gated error attribution on LoCoMo.

We trace each incorrect response to its earliest point of failure in the pipeline (top). Memory errors—where salient information is lost or distorted during formation—dominate across baselines (e.g., 52% for MemGAS), vastly exceeding profile generation and response generation errors combined. 

The evolution of conversational AI is rapidly shifting from isolated, single-turn interactions toward life-long digital companions. As AI agents become embedded in daily life, maintaining persistent context beyond the limits of standard LLM context windows has become a ne-cessity (Xu et al., 2022; Bae et al., 2022). However, simply attaching an external memory module is not enough: users’ interaction histo-ries are often vast, repetitive, and dominated by trivia. The real chal-lenge is not storage, but manage-ment —deciding what to remem-ber, how to organize memories, and what to recall for a given con-text. Two main paradigms have emerged, but each falls short. One extreme is to store all the past interactions and apply Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) to surface relevant context when a new question arrives. As the memory volume grows, however, the retrieval results tend to become noisy and repetitive (Borgeaud et al., 2022; Zhong et al., 2024; Lee et al., 2024). Another trend is to actively compress and curate long-term memo-ries, but neither prompting-based (Li et al., 2024; Xu et al., 2025b) nor reinforcement-learning–based (Yan 1

> arXiv:2606.04120v1 [cs.CL] 2 Jun 2026

et al., 2025; Wang et al., 2025) variants have proved to maintain high-quality memory, which reliably captures user preferences while preserving salient but nuanced details required for future conversations across diverse topics. Our error analysis on the LoCoMo benchmark (Maharana et al., 2024) reveals that in state-of-the-art solutions imprecise or incomplete memory can block well-personalized answers on up to 52% of questions. How do human beings cope with a lifetime of experiences without being overwhelmed? Cognitive science suggests we do not try to remember everything (Atkinson and Shiffrin, 1968; Baddeley, 2000): selective attention filters what gets encoded, as recent traces remain active in working memory to shape ongoing decisions (Baddeley and Hitch, 1974). What survives long-term is structurally organized: enduring facts serve as hard constraints on what is true, while value-laden preferences act as soft biases on what feels right (Tulving, 1972). Guided by these principles, we propose SaliMory , an agentic memory-management framework built around three complementary stores: a factual snapshot of verifiable facts about the user, a set of long-term preferences 

capturing subjective tastes, and a short-term working memory of recent details the user likely still has in mind. The factual snapshot supplies hard constraints; preferences supply soft criteria; working memory surfaces emerging interests worth revisiting. A single memory-management module operates on these stores in three roles: (i) selective attention : judging which turns are salient enough to record; (ii) consolidation : updating and forgetting memory; and (iii) cue-driven utilization : retrieving and applying relevant memories at inference. 

SaliMory trains one compact language model to perform all three roles via reinforcement learning (RL). Because the reward for the final answer quality alone is too sparse and too distant to supervise intermediate memory decisions, we introduce two complementary mechanisms. The stage-wise process reward scores not only final-answer correctness and personalization, but also the quality of the resulting memory and the soundness of each intermediate decision (saliency, utilization). A reward-decomposed contrastive refinement step then amplifies the memory-management signal: within each Group Relative Policy Optimization (GRPO) (Shao et al., 2024) rollout batch, we construct role-specific preference pairs that upweight memory decisions in the overall objective. Together, these mechanisms address the credit-assignment problem. To summarize, our paper makes three contributions. 

• Cognitively inspired memory architecture. We separate factual snapshots, subjective preferences, and short-term working memory, and define three complementary memory-management roles—saliency filter, memory booster, and memory utilizer—that together ground long-horizon conversations. 

• Memory-anchored RL We propose a stage-wise process reward system that tracks memory in every stage and further propose a reward-decomposed contrastive refinement over GRPO rollouts, assuring the high-quality of memory formation and end response generation. 

• New benchmark and evaluation protocol. To fully evaluate memory’s impact on conversation agents, we introduce a new LoCoMo-P13n benchmark which builds on the original LoCoMo with personalizable queries. We also introduce a multi-step evaluation protocol that jointly stresses precise memory recall and personalization QA. Empirically, using a 9B model, SaliMory outperforms the SOTA by 10.2% in end-to-end accuracy and delivers a massive 23.5-point gain in Good Personalization rate. 

## 2 Related Work  

> Memory-Augmented Language Models.

Equipping LLMs with persistent context traditionally follows two paradigms. Parametric Memory updates model weights via fine-tuning (e.g., FireAct (Chen et al., 2023), AgentLumos (Yin et al., 2024)) or soft parameters (SELF-PARAM (Wang et al., 2024)), but suffers from catastrophic forgetting and poor generalization to unseen queries. Retrieval-Based Memory abstracts (Borgeaud et al., 2022; Lee et al., 2024) experiences into external datastores, using semantic search to fetch relevant context. However, because retrieval relies purely on semantic matching rather than downstream utility, it struggles to reliably distinguish critical objective facts from transient remarks, often returning noisy or fragmented context.  

> Conversational Memory Structures.

To overcome RAG’s limitations, agentic systems organize context into distinct topologies. Linear memory treats history sequentially; MemGPT (Packer et al., 2023) manages 2Figure 2 SaliMory architecture. 

context using OS-like FIFO queues, while MemoryBank (Zhong et al., 2024) decays older interactions. Layered memory stratifies information to prioritize relevance, with MemoryOS (Kang et al., 2025) segregating short, mid, and long-term stores based on access frequency, and LD-Agent (Li et al., 2025) separating transient dialogue from enduring personas. Finally, tree and graph-based memories map relational dependencies, with A-Mem (Xu et al., 2025b) constructing dynamic networks, AssoMem (Zhang et al., 2026a) mimicking human associative memory for dense searches, and Mem0 (Chhikara et al., 2025) utilizing entity-centric graphs. While these explicit topologies improve organization, they rely on static prompting and fragile heuristics.  

> Reinforcement Learning for Memory Management.

To overcome static heuristics, recent works increasingly formulate memory management as an RL problem. MEM1 (Zhou et al., 2025) uses RL to compress history into a constant-sized state, but its monolithic memory cannot separate facts from preferences. MemRL (Zhang et al., 2026b) applies runtime RL to update retrieval Q-values but ignores memory creation quality, while MemGen (Zhang et al., 2025) generates implicit, human-unreadable latent memory. Most relevant to our work are Memory-R1 (Yan et al., 2025) and Mem-α (Wang et al., 2025), which train agents to execute explicit memory operations (e.g., ADD, UPDATE). While pioneering, their monolithic rewards obscure whether failures stem from in a multi-stage pipeline. HCAPO (Tan et al., 2026) mitigates this via hindsight re-weighting but lacks isolated supervision for distinct roles. SaliMory solves this by introducing a stage-wise process reward system and reward-decomposed contrastive refinement, providing the fine-grained credit assignment required to optimize a structured, multi-stage memory system end-to-end. 

## 3 Methodology 

We present SaliMory , an end-to-end agentic memory framework designed to coordinate and optimize conversational memory for downstream response generation. 

3.1 Problem Definition and Memory Bank 

In long-horizon conversational settings, an agent receives all conversation history H and a current user query 

q. The goal is to produce a contextualized and personalized answer ˆa that satisfies two criteria: accurately answering the query, and seamlessly grounding in the personal history. 3Because H grows unboundedly and is dominated by trivia, we do not condition on it directly. Instead, we maintain a dynamically evolving memory bank M, derived from H, and reformulate the task as ˆa = πgen (q, M).

Inspired by human memory systems, M is not a flat buffer but three dedicated stores, M = ( ¯F , ¯P , ¯W ): (i) 

factual bank ¯F : objective statements about the user that can be verifiable (e.g., being lactose intolerant); (ii) 

preference bank ¯P : subjective tastes and leanings that act as soft criteria for stylistic tailoring (e.g., preference for oat milk); (iii) working memory ¯W : recent salient turns the user likely still has in mind (e.g., asking about organic food this morning). Separating long-term profile from short-term context, and objective facts from subjective preferences, allows the agent to differentiate, yielding sharper personalization than a flat context window allows. Given this structured memory, the core challenge shifts from storage to dynamic management . An effective memory manager must autonomously resolve three sequential decisions: (i) What enters memory? Act as an attentional gate, deciding which turns carry salient information worth extracting and which to discard. (ii) How is memory updated? Route each extraction to the correct store ( ¯F , ¯P , or ¯W ), reconcile with existing entries, and retire stale items from working memory. (iii) How is memory used? At query time, synthesize relevant entries across the three stores into a query-adapted profile that conditions the generator. 

3.2 The SaliMory Architecture and RL Framework 

To separate the cognitive load of memory management from conversational reasoning for latency optimization, the SaliMory architecture (Figure 2) contains two distinct computational stages: an offline stage that builds and maintains the structured memory, and a runtime stage that leverages it.  

> The Offline Stage

processes each session of conversations asynchronously to produce an updated memory bank M. First, the Saliency Filter drops transient noises. Second, the memBooster processes salient turns, incrementally updates the factual bank ¯F and the preference bank ¯P , and maintains the working memory bank ¯W within a sliding time window.  

> The Runtime Stage

executes when a new user query q arrives. The memUtilizer finds relevant memories from the current memory bank, obtaining an adapted user profile Mq . To ensure memory management is isolated from foundational conversational reasoning, a separate, entirely frozen LLM ( πgen ) then produces the final response ˆa = πgen (q, Mq ).To autonomously execute the three memory decisions defined above, SaliMory trains a single, unified policy model πθ via RL rather than relying on separate specialized models. By conditioning πθ on distinct instruction prompts, this single model learns to act as the saliency filter, the memory booster, and the profile utilizer. We formally define the state at any given step as the combination of the conversational context and the memory bank (q, H, M). The action space corresponds to the generative outputs of our policy model πθ ,including the saliency decision, the updated memory M, and the query-dependent profile Mq . Our goal for the RL training is to manipulate the state through these actions to maximize the quality of the final downstream response ˆa.

3.3 Stage-Wise Process Reward System 

Recent advances in RL for reasoning models (Guo et al., 2025) rely heavily on Reinforcement Learning with Variable Reward (RLVR), where the model is optimized purely on a final, outcome-based reward. However, applying pure RLVR to a complex, multi-stage memory pipeline creates a severe credit assignment bottleneck. If the frozen generator produces an incorrect or poorly personalized final answer, an outcome-only reward cannot determine where the pipeline failed. To solve this, SaliMory decomposes the learning signals into a dense, hierarchical stage-wise process reward, providing targeted, orthogonal feedback to each specific role using LLM judges. 4Reward 1: Response Quality (Multiplicative Gating) The primary objective evaluates the final generated answer ˆa

against the ground truth a for accuracy α ∈ [0 , 1] and personalization quality p ∈ [0 , 1] ∪ { n/a }. We formulate this reward using a strict multiplicative gate: 

R1 =

(

α · (1 + λp · p) if personalization is applicable 

α otherwise (1) This multiplicative form embeds a critical inductive bias: personalization is only valuable when the underlying answer is factually correct. By multiplying the terms, an incorrect but highly personalized response receives 

R1 ≈ 0, preventing the policy from learning to "decorate" hallucinated answers.  

> Reward 2: Memory Quality (Asymmetric Penalty)

To directly supervise the memory booster’s writing behavior independently of the final answer, a judge evaluates the finalized memory bank MK for factuality ϕf (fraction of entries faithful to the source) and vagueness ϕv (fraction of entries losing actionable specificity). Defining the composite memory quality as γ = ϕf · (1 − ϕv ), we apply an asymmetric reward: 

R2 = −λpen · (1 − γ) + λbon · γ, where λpen > λ bon (2) The asymmetry ( λpen = 3 × λbon reflects the fact that low-quality memories actively sabotage downstream generation. This asymmetric penalty exerts a conservative pressure on the booster: it learns that it is strictly better to omit a marginal memory than to encode a vague one.  

> Reward 3: Utilization and Filter Quality

The final level provides targeted, isolated feedback to the utilizer and the saliency filter. It is defined as: 

R3 = λμ · μ + λκ · κ (3) Here, μ ∈ [0 , 1] evaluates how effectively the adapted profile Mq captures question-relevant constraints without including distractors. Meanwhile, κ evaluates the filter’s binary gating decisions against ground-truth labels using a recall-weighted blend: κ = (1 − wr ) · Prec + wr · Rec because missing a salient turn (false negative) is worse than flagging an extra non-salient one (false positive).  

> Total Reward

The total per-episode reward LGRPO = R1 + R2 + R3. The key property is role-specific credit assignment : R1 (range [0 , 1 +λp]) dominates as the primary objective, R2 (range [−λpen , λ bon ]) directly shapes the booster’s writing behavior independently of response quality, and R3 (range [0 , λ μ+λκ]) separately shapes the utilizer’s synthesis and the filter’s gating. 

3.4 Reward-Decomposed Contrastive Learning 

Standard GRPO assigns a single advantage scalar to all generative traces within a rollout—affecting the filter, booster, and utilizer equally even though we use a role-specific process rewards. Consequently, a rollout might achieve a high total reward simply due to a fortunate generation by the utilizer, which inadvertently sends the upstream booster an unearned positive gradient even it it writes vague or poor memories. To fully resolve this intra-episode credit assignment bottleneck, SaliMory exploits our reward decomposition to build 

role-specific contrastive preference pairs , attributing credit to each role from its own contribution. 

> Booster Contrastive Pairs (

Lboost cont ) For memory booster, we select winner ( w) and loser ( l) rollouts based strictly on the R2 memory quality score, completely ignoring the total episode reward. We compute a contrastive loss scaled by a gap weight ∆R2 = |Rw 

> 2

− Rl

> 2

|. This gap weight actively modulates the gradient magnitude based on preference confidence: when the quality gap between two memory writes is large, the contrastive signal strongly pushes the booster; when marginal, the loss contributes minimally, avoiding noisy updates from ambiguous comparisons. 

> Utilizer Contrastive Pairs & Similarity Gating (

Lutil cont ) For the utilizer, winner and loser rollouts are selected based on the utilization score μ (from R3). However, a naive comparison here is causally confounded: a superior adapted profile might simply be the result of the booster providing better upstream memories to work with. To isolate the utilizer’s true synthesis ability from upstream memory noise, we introduce a causal gating mechanism utilizing the Jaccard similarity between the memory banks of the two rollouts: sim (Cw, Cl) = |entries (Cw) ∩ entries (Cl)||entries (Cw) ∪ entries (Cl)| > τ sim (4) 5Contrastive pairs are only formed if this similarity exceeds the threshold τsim . By enforcing this strict similarity gate, we guarantee that any difference in profile quality is strictly attributable to the utilizer’s own synthesis ability—how it selected, prioritized, and phrased the context—rather than differences in the underlying available information. Below-threshold pairs are discarded, ensuring the utilizer only receives gradients it actually earned. These two role-specific contrastive refinements combine to form our additional learning boost: 

LCont = λb · L boost cont + λu · L util cont (5) Ultimately, this boost does not replace the main RL objective, but acts alongside it to provide the precise credit assignment necessary to train a highly structured cognitive pipeline. 

3.5 Full Objective and Policy Optimization 

The complete per-step loss seamlessly integrates our stage-wise process rewards into the standard GRPO (Shao et al., 2024) objective with our novel contrastive boost: 

Ltotal = 1

N

X

> ξ

LGRPO (ξ) + LCont (6) where N is the total number of generative traces and LGRPO is the standard clipped surrogate objective with KL regularization optimized using our hierarchical rewards R.Crucially, this combined objective finalizes our solution to the credit assignment problem through selective gradient routing. The main GRPO loss provides the baseline update and trains the saliency filter, while the 

LCont boost selectively routes gradients to update only the booster and utilizer parameters based on their isolated preference pairs. 

## 4 Experimental Setup  

> Dataset.

To evaluate SaliMory , the dataset must satisfy Chat AI scenarios where user conversation history, current query and gold response are provided. Thus, we select LoCoMo (Maharana et al., 2024), a long-term conversational memory benchmark with 10 users and ∼58 multi-session dialogues per user. The original benchmark provides query types across five categories (multi-hop, temporal, open-domain, single-hop, adversarial) which are all memory recall queries. We argue that personalized engagements are crucial for conversational AI, yet they are absent from existing memory datasets such as LoCoMo and LongMemEval (Wu et al., 2024). To address this, we extend LoCoMo and introduce a new dataset named LoCoMo-P13n where two personalizable query categories: recommendation and implicit personalization are curated to support such research (more details can be seen in Appendix B.1). Furthermore, to validate the generalizability of 

SaliMory , we also evaluate on an internal dataset where real-world Chat AI traffic is collected as in Section 5.5.  

> Models and training.

The trainable policy πθ uses Qwen3.5-9B-Instruct(Team, 2026); the frozen generator 

πgen uses Qwen3-235B-A22B-Instruct(Yang et al., 2025) and the judge uses GPT-4o(Hurst et al., 2024). For fair comparisons, we reproduce all baselines with the same settings; for zero-shot agentic method, we use Gemini-3-flash (Pichai et al., 2025) to play as the agent to do memory management and utilization. Full training details and hyperparameters setup are in Section B.5 1. 

> Baselines and ablations.

To validate the superiority of SaliMory compared to SOTA memory studies, we compare against four existing distinct popular memory paradigms: Infinite Context , which treats the entire history as memory; RAG – A-Mem(Xu et al., 2025c), MemoryGAS(Xu et al., 2025a), which process history into a memory base for future use; Zero-shot Agentic , which uses powerful LLM as agent for memory operation and Learnable Memory – Mem-R1(Yan et al., 2025), which learns to memorize and utilize user info in an RL framework. 

> 1We also provide a scale of backbone models and training strategy ablation analysis in Appendix D.

6Table 1 Main results on LoCoMo and LoCoMo-P13n. Response quality for recall and personalizable queries and memory quality. Best in bold . ↑/↓: higher/lower is better. 

Response Quality Memory 

QA Personalization Categories (%) Quality Method Acc. ↑ Good ↑ Basic Bad ↓ Under. ↓ NA ↓ Vague ↓ Fact. ↑

Infinite Context 33.4 18.2 13.6 0.8 39.3 27.3 - -Zero-shot Agentic 70.9 6.6 20.9 6.1 42.8 23.6 29.7 86.1 A-Mem 61.6 21.9 49.1 6.4 8.5 13.1 44.2 44.3 MemoryGAS 49.1 5.1 8.2 11.6 8.9 66.2 46.7 59.3 Mem-R1 62.7 16.3 21.8 7.4 19.9 34.6 35.7 76.8 

SaliMory 72.9 39.8 44.1 1.4 5.3 9.4 19.6 93.9  

> Evaluation Protocol.

To comprehensively assess memory-driven conversational agents, we introduce a novel LLM-as-a-Judge protocol that thoroughly evaluates fine-grained personalization and memory bottlenecks, with full implementation details provided in Appendices B.3 and B.4. 

• End-to-End Personalization Quality: Standard memory QA accuracy (Jiang et al., 2025) fails to capture whether an agent effectively uses memory. Thus, we introduce a Three-Step Personalization Judge .Step 1 determines if the response incorporates user memories. Step 2 classifies personalized responses as Good (rich and value-adding), Basic (superficial), or Bad (intrusive, irrelevant, or hallucinated). Step 3 evaluates unpersonalized responses to determine if relevant memories existed but were ignored (Underuse ), or there is genuinely no personalization potential ( NA ). 

• Intermediate Memory Eval: We evaluate the finalized memory bank for Vagueness (entries lacking actionable specificity) and Factuality (faithfulness to the source). We also measure Utilization , scoring how well the synthesized profile captures question-relevant constraints. 

• Gated Error-Bucket: For every incorrect response, we trace the failure to its origin—Memory Error, Profile Error, or Generation Error—to pinpoint specific reasoning bottlenecks. 

## 5 Experimental Results and Analysis 

In this section, we will answer RQ 1. in Section 5.1, RQ 2. in Section 5.2, 5.3 and RQ 3. in Section 5.5, 5.4, supplementary results can be seen in Appendix D: 

• RQ 1. Does SaliMory exhibit better performances over existing memory approaches? 

• RQ 2. What contributes to the improvements made by SaliMory ?

• RQ 3. How does SaliMory generalize to different query types in Chat AI scenarios? 

5.1 Comparative Study  

> End-to-End Quality.

As presented in Table 1, SaliMory achieves the highest E2E Accuracy (72.9%) and reaches 39.8% Good Personalization rate on recall and personalizable queries, respectively. Crucially, despite that SaliMory being trained on a compact backbone model (Qwen3.5-9B), it outperforms the Zero-shot baseline powered by a much larger model Gemini-3-Flash—delivering a 33.2-point absolute gain in Good Personalization. Notably, A-Mem achieves a higher Basic personalization rate than SaliMory , but its Good personalization rate (21.9%) is much lower due to low memory quality. Furthermore, SALIMORY nearly eradicates the Bad Personalization rate (1.4% vs. Mem-R1’s 7.4%), proving our R1 reward stops the model from ‘decorating’ hallucinated responses. 7Table 2 RL training ablation studies. Best in each section in bold . ↑/↓: higher/lower is better.                                                              

> QA Personalization Quality Memory Quality Memory Config Acc. ↑Good ↑Basic Bad ↓Vague ↓Fact. ↑Utility ↑
> (a) Reward composition on SaliMory
> R1 only 65.8 30.6 41.7 4.5 28.3 85.4 0.747 R1 + R2 69.2 35.7 41.9 3.6 22.4 91.7 0.799 R1 + R2 + R3 72.9 39.8 44.1 1.4 19.6 93.9 0.917
> (b) Contrastive refinement
> GRPO only 68.6 26.8 39.5 3.2 31.7 90.9 0.793 + Booster contr. only 69.1 29.5 41.7 3.2 20.6 92.4 0.799 + Utilizer contr. only 71.7 35.9 41.7 1.8 22.1 91.7 0.906 + Both (full SaliMory )72.9 39.8 44.1 1.4 19.6 93.9 0.917

Why do prior memory methods fail at scale? Different paradigms prioritize the wrong stages. Infinite Context provides all information but fails at utilization (39.3% underuse) because raw logs overwhelm the reasoning capacity. Conversely, methods like MemGAS and Mem-R1 focus heavily on memory formation but struggle to effectively retrieve and apply it, resulting in high NA rates (66.2% and 34.6%). Why does SaliMory help? 

By orchestrating memory into cognitively-structured stores and applying a role-decomposed RL framework, 

SaliMory explicitly co-optimizes both memory formation and cue-driven utilization, drastically reducing NA (9.4%) and underused (5.3%) responses.  

> Memory Quality.

SaliMory reduces the Vague memory rate to 19.6% (vs. 35.7% for Mem-R1) and increases the Factual rate to 93.9%. This validates that SaliMory successfully filters noise during memory formation. While the Gemini-3-Flash agentic baseline achieves decent memory factuality (86.1%) and high QA Accuracy (70.9%), its dismal personalization score proves that without dedicated training for memory utilization, even massive frontier models completely waste memory context. Following our stage-wise process reward and contrastive refinement, SaliMory bridges this gap, enabling a significantly smaller open-source model to effectively couple memory formation with downstream utilization. 

5.2 Ablation Study 

To understand what contributes to the improvements made by SaliMory , we conducted extensive ablation studies on reward compositions, contrastive refinement components, and memory types.  

> Reward composition.

Table 2(a) validates our stage-wise process reward. Using only R1 (end-to-end) yields Accuracy of 65.8% and Utilization of 0.747. Adding R2 (memory quality) improves Accuracy to 69.2% and drops Vague from 28.3% to 22.4%. Incorporating R3 (utilization) brings the system to full performance (72.9%, 0.917). This confirms that sparse global signals are inadequate for training intermediate memory operations —explicit stage-wise supervision is necessary.  

> Contrastive refinement components.

As shown in Table 2(b), Booster contrastive training specifically improves memory formation (raising Factuality to 92.4%) while dropping the Vague rate from 31.7% to 20.6%. Conversely, Utilizer contrastive training specifically enhances retrieval (boosting Good Personalization to 35.9% and utilization score to 0.906). Combining both ensures each module only receives gradients it earned, yielding full system performance.  

> Memory type comparison.

As illustrated in Figure 3, isolating the memory banks reveals their distinct cognitive roles. The Working Memory bank primarily drives QA Accuracy (66.2%), while the Preference bank drives Good Personalization (22.7%). Crucially, merely combining these raw banks bottlenecks Good Personalization at 28.6%. It is only when the Utilizer synthesizes these stores into a query-adapted profile that personalization leaps to 39.8%, proving that active context construction is strictly superior to raw retrieval. 

5.3 Training Dynamics Analysis 

8Figure 4 Training dynamics of SaliMory. (a) Stage-wise process rewards. (b) Policy and contrastive losses. (c) Downstream quality metrics. Curves are EMA-smoothed.  

> Figure 3 Impact of memory types on QA accuracy and personalization quality

Figure 4 illustrates SaliMory ’s train-ing dynamics. Panel (a) reveals abottom-up causal learning chain: the memory quality reward ( R2) improves first (rising from −0.26 to −0.04) be-fore the utilization reward ( R3) and the response reward ( R1) follow. Panel (b) shows both contrastive losses con-verging (booster: 2.6 →0.7, utilizer: 1.4 →0.35), demonstrating that role-decomposed preference signals provide targeted credit assignment. Panel (c) validates that these training signals translate to downstream quality: Vague Rate drops to 19.6%, Utilization Score reaches 0.917, and Good P13n Rate im-proves 6 × to 39.8%, with the improve-ment order mirroring the reward progression. 

5.4 Gated Error Analysis 

We conduct a gated error analysis to isolate where failures occur in the pipeline (Figure 1). Memory creation errors account for 37.9% of failures in MemGAS and 25.3% in Mem-R1, validating that poor memory formation is the primary bottleneck in existing systems. SaliMory not only provides the lowest memory (16.4%) and profile generation (5.8%) error rates, but it pushes the overall system to the highest correctness rate (72.9%). Why does SaliMory succeed? By enforcing selective attention and using the asymmetric R2 penalty, 

SaliMory actively prevents vague or hallucinated information from polluting the memory stores. The remaining failures are largely isolated to the frozen generator after curing the upstream memory bottleneck, confirming our memory management module effectively fulfills its role. 

5.5 Efficiency & Generalizability Analysis  

> Efficiency Analysis.

Beyond quality, practical deployment demands strict efficiency. As shown in Table 3(a), the Zero-shot baseline indiscriminately stores 127.4 generic memories per user, creating a severe computational bottleneck with 38 seconds of memory formation latency. In contrast, SaliMory ’s saliency filter and booster actively condense context into just 89.7 highly specific entries. This deliberate filtering reduces memory formation latency to 0.5 seconds—a 76 × speedup. At runtime, inference latency drops nearly 5 × (1.2s to 0.26s), proving that feeding the generator a synthesized profile is vastly more efficient than processing raw retrieval chunks.  

> Real-World Generalizability.

We deployed SaliMory on an internal dataset of real-world Chat AI traffic. As 9shown in Table 3(b), the relative margins remain highly consistent. Even in this noisy, unstructured setting, 

SaliMory more than triples the Good Personalization rate (1.7% → 5.5%), drops the Vague memory rate from 63.9% to 46.1%, and spikes memory Factuality from 41.9% to 60.7%. This confirms that SaliMory ’s cog-nitive architecture and role-decomposed training generalize robustly beyond benchmark-specific distributions.                           

> Table 3 (a) Efficiency and memory store statistics; (b) Results on a real-world Chat AI traffic data.
> Metric Zero-shot SaliMory
> (a) Efficiency Analysis
> Avg. memories per user 127.4 89.7 Avg. memory token length 8.6 10.9 Avg. adapted memories per query 1.9 1.7 Fact : Pref : WM ratio 21:11:68 9:14:77 Memory formation latency (s/episode) 38 0.5 Training latency (s/episode) -1.14 Inference latency (s/query) 1.2 0.26
> (b) Generalizability Analysis
> Good P13n% 1.7 5.5 Vague% 63.9 46.1 Factuality% 41.9 60.7

## 6 Conclusion 

We presented SaliMory , an agentic learnable memory-management frame-work that addresses the fundamental challenge of conversational memory: not what to store, but how to manage it. Our work introduces three key novel-ties. First, a cognitively-inspired mem-ory architecture that separates factual snapshots, subjective preferences, and working memory, enabling structured reasoning over heterogeneous user in-formation. Second, a stage-wise, role-decomposed RL training paradigm that combines hierarchical process rewards with reward-decomposed contrastive re-finement, directly resolving the credit-assignment problem that has limited prior RL-based memory agents. Third, an extended evaluation protocol and a new benchmark LoCoMo-P13n are proposed to jointly stress precise recall and nuanced personalization across diverse query types in Chat AI. Empirically, SaliMory outperforms strong baselines—while operating at 5x lower inference latency than the zero-shot baseline. These results demonstrate that memory management, grounded in cognitive science and trained with decomposed rewards, is the key to build lifelong conversational agents. 10 References 

Richard C Atkinson and Richard M Shiffrin. Human memory: A proposed system and its control processes. Psychology of Learning and Motivation , 2:89–195, 1968. Alan Baddeley. The episodic buffer: A new component of working memory? Trends in Cognitive Sciences , 4(11): 417–423, 2000. Alan D. Baddeley and Graham Hitch. Working memory. In Gordon H. Bower, editor, The Psychology of Learning and Motivation: Advances in Research and Theory , volume 8, pages 47–89. Academic Press, New York, 1974. Sanghwan Bae, Donghyun Kwak, Soyoung Kang, Myoung-Wan Lee, Sungdong Kim, Yun Jeong, Hyungjoo Kim, Eunho Lee, and Jungwoo Seo. Keep me updated! memory management in long-term conversations. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2022 , pages 3769–3781, 2022. Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Jordan Hoffmann, Trevor Cai, Eliza Rutherford, Katie Millican, George Bm van den Driessche, Jean-Baptiste Lespiau, Bogdan Damoc, Aidan Clark, et al. Improving language models by retrieving from trillions of tokens. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 2206–2240. PMLR, 2022. Baian Chen, Chang Shu, Ehsan Shareghi, Nigel Collier, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao. Fireact: Toward language agent fine-tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.05915 , 2023. Prateek Chhikara, Aditya Khant, and Deshraj Yadav. Mem0: Building production-ready AI agents with scalable long-term memory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.19413 , 2025. Daya Guo, Dejian Yang, Haowei Zhang, Junxiao Song, Ruoyu Zhang, Runxin Xu, Qihao Zhu, et al. DeepSeek-R1: Incentivizing reasoning capability in LLMs via reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.12948 , 2025. Aaron Hurst, Adam Lerer, Adam P Goucher, Adam Perelman, Aditya Ramesh, Aidan Clark, AJ Ostrow, Akila Welihinda, Alan Hayes, Alec Radford, et al. Gpt-4o system card. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.21276 , 2024. Hongda Jiang, Xinyuan Zhang, Siddhant Garg, Rishab Arora, Shiun-Zu Kuo, Jiayang Xu, Aaron Colak, and Xin Luna Dong. Memory-qa: Answering recall questions based on multimodal memories. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 24255–24277, 2025. Jiazheng Kang, Mingming Ji, Zhe Zhao, and Ting Bai. Memory os of ai agent. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 25972–25981, 2025. Kuang-Huei Lee, Xinyun Chen, Hiroki Furuta, John Canny, and Ian Fischer. A human-inspired reading agent with gist memory of very long contexts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.09727 , 2024. Hao Li, Chenghao Yang, An Zhang, Yang Deng, Xiang Wang, and Tat-Seng Chua. Hello again! llm-powered personalized agent for long-term dialogue. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference of the Nations of the Americas Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,pages 5259–5276, 2025. Jiying Li et al. LD-Agent: Longitudinal dialogue agent with self-evolving memory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.18484 ,2024. Adyasha Maharana, Dong-Ho Lee, Sergey Tuber, Amir Rahimi, Mohit Joshi, Khyathi Raghavi Chandu, and Yunyao Dong. Evaluating very long-term conversational memory of LLM agents. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , pages 13064–13080, 2024. Charles Packer, Vivian Fang, Shishir_G Patil, Kevin Lin, Sarah Wooders, and Joseph_E Gonzalez. Memgpt: towards llms as operating systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.08560 , 2023. Sundar Pichai, Demis Hassabis, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. A new era of intelligence with gemini 3. Google. URL:https://blog.google/products-and-platforms/products/gemini/gemini-3/) , 2025. Zhihong Shao, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu, Junxiao Song, Mingchuan Zhang, Y. K. Li, Y. Wu, and Daya Guo. DeepSeekMath: Pushing the limits of mathematical reasoning in open language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.03300 , 2024. Hui-Ze Tan, Xiao-Wen Yang, Hao Chen, Jie-Jing Shao, Yi Wen, Yuteng Shen, Weihong Luo, Xiku Du, Lan-Zhe Guo, and Yu-Feng Li. Hindsight credit assignment for long-horizon llm agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.08754 , 2026. Qwen Team. Qwen3. 5-omni technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.15804 , 2026. 

11 Endel Tulving. Episodic and semantic memory. Organization of Memory , pages 381–403, 1972. Yu Wang, Xinshuang Liu, Xiusi Chen, Sean O’Brien, Junda Wu, and Julian McAuley. Self-updatable large language models by integrating context into model parameters. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.00487 , 2024. Yuxin Wang, Ryuichi Takanobu, and Minlie Huang. Mem-α: Learning memory construction via reinforcement learning. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.25911 , 2025. Di Wu, Hongwei Wang, Wenhao Yu, Yuwei Zhang, Kai-Wei Chang, and Dong Yu. Longmemeval: Benchmarking chat assistants on long-term interactive memory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.10813 , 2024. Derong Xu, Yi Wen, Pengyue Jia, Yingyi Zhang, Yichao Wang, Huifeng Guo, Ruiming Tang, Xiangyu Zhao, Enhong Chen, Tong Xu, et al. Towards multi-granularity memory association and selection for long-term conversational agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.19549 , 2025a. Junfeng Xu, Yuxiang Liang, and Qiaozhu Mei. A-Mem: Agentic memory for LLM agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.12110 , 2025b. Wujiang Xu, Kai Mei, Hang Gao, Juntao Tan, Zujie Liang, and Yongfeng Zhang. A-mem: Agentic memory for llm agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.12110 , 2025c. Xinchao Xu, Zhibin Gou, Wenquan Wu, Zheng-Yu Niu, Hua Wu, Haifeng Wang, and Shihang Wang. Long time no see! open-domain conversation with long-term persona memory. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2022 , pages 2639–2650, 2022. Ming Yan, Yiming Yang, and Qipeng Huang. Memory-R1: Enhancing large language model agents to manage and utilize memories via reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.19828 , 2025. An Yang, Anfeng Li, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chang Gao, Chengen Huang, Chenxu Lv, et al. Qwen3 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.09388 , 2025. Da Yin, Faeze Brahman, Abhilasha Ravichander, Khyathi Chandu, Kai-Wei Chang, Yejin Choi, and Bill Yuchen Lin. Agent lumos: Unified and modular training for open-source language agents. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 12380–12403, 2024. Guibin Zhang, Muxin Fu, and Shuicheng Yan. Memgen: Weaving generative latent memory for self-evolving agents. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.24704 , 2025. Kai Zhang, Xinyuan Zhang, Ejaz Ahmed, Hongda Jiang, Caleb Kumar, Kai Sun, Zhaojiang Lin, Sanat Sharma, Shereen Oraby, Aaron Colak, et al. Assomem: Scalable memory qa with multi-signal associative retrieval. In The Fourteenth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2026a. Shengtao Zhang, Jiaqian Wang, Ruiwen Zhou, Junwei Liao, Yuchen Feng, Zhuo Li, Yujie Zheng, Weinan Zhang, Ying Wen, Zhiyu Li, et al. Memrl: Self-evolving agents via runtime reinforcement learning on episodic memory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.03192 , 2026b. Wanjun Zhong, Lianghong Guo, Qiqi Gao, He Ye, and Yanlin Wang. MemoryBank: Enhancing large language models with long-term memory. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 38, pages 19724–19731, 2024. Zijian Zhou, Ao Qu, Zhaoxuan Wu, Sunghwan Kim, Alok Prakash, Daniela Rus, Jinhua Zhao, Bryan Kian Hsiang Low, and Paul Pu Liang. Mem1: Learning to synergize memory and reasoning for efficient long-horizon agents. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.15841 , 2025. 

12 Appendix 

## A Use of LLM 

In paper writing, we use LLMs solely for checking typos and grammar errors; they are not used for any other purposes beyond this. 

## B Experimental Setup Details 

B.1 Dataset Details 

Table 4 summarize the extended LoCoMo dataset. The original benchmark (Maharana et al., 2024) provides QA pairs across four evaluation categories (multi-hop, temporal, open-domain, single-hop); we contribute two additional categories—recommendation and implicit personalization—that require memory-driven personal-ization, adding 1,108 QA pairs (42% of the total) to form a new dataset named LoCoMo-P13n . Category 5 (adversarial/unanswerable) is excluded following prior work. Each user’s conversation history spans multiple sessions with natural temporal gaps. 

How we construct the data We use LLM, LlaMa-3.2-70B, to semi-automatically generate the data following a 4-step strategy:(1) extracting relevant information from conversations, (2) identifying conversation reference points,               

> Table 4 Dataset statistics.
> Statistic Value
> Users 28 Total QA pairs 2,637 Original (Cat 1–4) 1,529 P13n extension (Cat 6–7) 1,108 Train / eval / test 60 / 20 / 20% Max turns per episode 80
> Per-category counts:
> Multi-hop 282 (10.7%) Temporal 321 (12.2%) Open-domain 96 (3.6%) Single-hop 830 (31.5%) Recommendation †603 (22.9%) Implicit P13n †505 (19.2%)
> †Our contributed annotations.

(3) aggregating related information, and (4) com-posing questions that—rather than directly query-ing conversation content—utilize extracted signals to enable personalized or recommended responses. We have a linguistic expert with background in data science to do manually review on LoCoMo-P13n .

Real-world Chat AI dataset To verify the gener-alizability of SaliMory , we further collect data from real world Chat AI traffic where real users are producing conversations. We use their past 28-days chat history as the user raw history to form memory. Unfortunately, this dataset is not able to be open-sourced due to privacy constraint, but the results in Section 5.5 verifies the effectiveness of 

SaliMory in real-world application. 

B.2 SaliMory Training Algorithm 

SaliMory training steps are shown in Algorithm 1. To ensure the complex multi-stage pipeline does not bottleneck compute, our training step utilizes GPU and API resources complementarily. First, the policy generates traces entirely on the GPU, and reference log-probabilities are pre-computed and cached. Second, the frozen generator and reward judges run concurrently via API, allowing the reference model to be safely offloaded to the CPU. Finally, during the update phase, only the policy model requires GPU memory since all reference probabilities were previously cached. Each training step performs E inner epochs over this cached rollout data, executing early stopping if the mean KL divergence exceeds 1.5× the target threshold. 

B.3 Three-Step Personalization Judge 

Standard single-score LLM-as-judge evaluation conflates whether a response uses personal information with whether it uses it well , and cannot detect cases where relevant memories existed but went unused. We design 13 Algorithm 1 SaliMory : Training Step  

> Require:

Batch of episodes {(Ce, q e, a ∗ 

> e

)}, policy πθ , reference πref , generators/judges πgen , π judge   

> 1: for

each episode e, each of G rollouts do   

> 2: Phase A (Filter):

st ← πfilt  

> θ

(ut, τ t) for all t; S ← { t : st = True }     

> 3: Phase B(Booster): for

k = 1, . . . , |S| : ⟨dk, v k, o k⟩ ← πboost  

> θ

(uk, τ k, Mk−1); Mk ←

Apply (Mk−1, d k, v k, o k)  

> 4: Phase C (Utilizer):

ρ ← πutil  

> θ

(MK , q e) 

> 5:

Cache log πold  

> θ

(y | P ) for all traces; pre-compute log πref (y | P )   

> 6: end for
> 7: Rewards:

ˆa ← πgen (ρ, Cimm , q ); compute R1, R 2, R 3 via πjudge ▷ API, concurrent   

> 8: Advantages:

˜Ae,g ← (Re,g − ¯Re)/σ Re for each episode e ▷ GRPO group norm.   

> 9: Contrastive pairs:

Construct Pb by R2; construct Pu by μ, gated on sim (Mw, Ml) > τ sim   

> 10: for

i = 1 , . . . , E do  

> 11:

Compute L via Eq. 6; update θ ▷ inner epoch   

> 12: if

mean KL > 1.5× target then   

> 13: break

▷ KL early stopping   

> 14: end if
> 15: end for

a three-step sequential judge that disentangles these dimensions (5). 

Task 1: Personalization Detection. A binary classifier determines whether the response incorporates personal information from the user’s memory beyond what is already present in the query or immediate conversation. The judge considers both explicit usage (e.g., “considering you like hiking, I recommend...”) and implicit usage (e.g., recommending a casual restaurant when the user’s memory includes a preference for casual dining). Crucially, information that is already present in the user’s query or conversational context does not count as personalization—the response must draw on stored memories. If personalized, proceed to Task 2; otherwise, proceed to Task 3. 

Task 2: Personalization Quality (if personalized). For personalized responses, a multi-criteria judge evaluates five dimensions: (1) richness —does the personalization go beyond simply inserting user information, using multiple memory signals in a natural way? (2) value-add —does the personalization enhance the response? (3) style —is the tone appropriate? (4) relevance —is the response on-topic? (5) quality —is the response coherent and non-hallucinated? These combine into three quality levels: 

• Good : rich personalization (criterion 1) with value-add (criterion 2) and good overall response quality (criteria 3–5). 

• Basic : personalization is present but not rich or not value-adding; overall response quality is acceptable. Core case: using the user’s name without deeper integration. 

• Bad : personalization is misapplied (intrusive, irrelevant, or offensive) or the overall response quality is poor despite personalization. 

Task 3: Signal Detection (if not personalized). For unpersonalized responses, the judge determines whether relevant memory signals existed that could have enhanced the response but were not used. This detects 

underuse —a failure mode invisible to standard evaluation. If no relevant signals exist (e.g., a purely factual query or no applicable user memory to personalize the query), the response is simply marked as not applicable (NA). 

Five-category taxonomy. The three tasks yield five mutually exclusive response categories, shown in 5. We derive three end-to-end personalization metrics from this taxonomy: P13n Rate (fraction of responses in any personalized category, including bad), Good P13n Rate (fraction in Good Personalized —the strictest measure), and Underuse Rate (fraction in Underuse —measuring missed opportunities). 14 Figure 5 Three-step personalization judge flowchart. Task 1 detects whether the response uses memory-based personaliza-tion. If yes, Task 2 evaluates quality (Good / Basic / Bad). If no, Task 3 checks whether relevant signals existed but went unused (Underuse) or were genuinely absent (Unpersonalized). The five leaf categories are mutually exclusive. 

B.4 Metric Definitions 

Table 5 provides definitions for all reported metrics.  

> Table 5

Evaluation metrics. E2E personalization metrics are derived from the three-step judge (B.3); memory metrics are judged independently.   

> Metric Level Definition

QA Accuracy E2E Fraction of responses judged correct against ground truth P13n Rate E2E Fraction in any personalized category (B.3) Good P13n Rate E2E Fraction in Good Personalized (B.3) Underuse Rate E2E Fraction in Underuse (B.3) Vague Rate Memory Fraction of memory entries too generic to be ac-tionable Factuality Rate Memory Fraction of entries faithful to source utterances Profile Util. Score Memory Judge-scored relevance of profile ρ to question q

([0 , 1] )Error Bucket Diagnostic Gated attribution of each failure to the earliest failing stage: memory → profile → generation 

Memory quality scoring. The judge evaluates each entry in MK against the original utterance that produced it. An entry is vague if it has lost the specificity needed to be actionable (e.g., “User likes food” vs. “User loves Thai curry”). An entry is non-factual if it misrepresents the source (e.g., “thinking about getting a dog” 

→ “owns a dog”). 

Error-bucket attribution. For each incorrect response, we apply a gated cascade: if the profile contains sufficient information to answer correctly → Generation Error ; else if the memory contains the information but the profile missed it → Profile Error ; else → Memory Error . Each failure is assigned to the earliest failing stage. 15 B.5 Hyperparameters  

> Table 6

Hyperparameters for SaliMory training.   

> Group Parameter Value

Training GRPO group size G 4Batch size 8Training epochs 5Inner update epochs E 4Optimization Learning rate 10 −5

Optimizer AdamW Warmup ratio 0.1 Gradient clip norm 1.0 RL Clip ratio ϵ 0.2 KL coefficient λKL 0.08 KL target (early stopping) 1.5 Reward Personalization weight λp 0.45 Memory penalty λpen 0.5 Memory bonus λbon 0.3 Utilization weight λμ 0.15 Filter weight λκ (recall wr =0 .6) 0.1 Contrastive Booster weight λb 0.15 Utilizer weight λu 0.1 Temperature η 0.15 Memory similarity threshold τsim 0.15 

For training, we use transformers and PyTorch to train on a computation node with 8 A100 GPUs. 

## C Limitation   

> Figure 6 Per-category accuracy.

SaliMory improves all categories, with the largest gains on recommendation and multi-hop questions that require memory synthesis. 

Despite the success brought by Sal-iMory , we still notice two limitations to be further studied in the future: De-pendence on a frozen large LLM for judg-ing. All three reward levels rely on a frozen large LLM (GPT-4o) — response accuracy, memory quality, and utiliza-tion are all assessed via LLM-as-a-judge calls. This means the training signal is bounded by the judge model’s own eval-uation capability and biases and further, the api calling would hinder the train-ing stability. Sequential memory forma-tion limits scalability to long conversa-tions. The booster must process salient turns sequentially (each turn needs the updated memory state from the previ-ous one), meaning memory formation latency scales linearly with conversation length. For the current dataset ( 16 turns/episode), this is manageable, but for real-world deployment with hundreds or thousands of turns per user, this becomes a bottleneck that batch parallelization cannot resolve. 16 Table 7 SaliMory results using different training strategies and backbone models. Best in each section in bold . ↑/↓:higher/lower is better.    

> E2E Quality Memory Quality Memory Utilization Config

Acc. ↑ Basic P13n Good P13n ↑ Vague ↓ Fact. ↑ Util. ↑

(a) Training strategy 

REINFORCE 36.9 23.7 12.9 68.6 43.9 0.291 PPO 39.2 23.9 15.7 67.9 48.6 0.393 GRPO 68.6 39.5 26.8 31.7 90.9 0.793 

SaliMory 72.9 44.1 39.8 19.6 93.9 0.917 

(b) Backbone models 

Llama3.2-1B 29.6 9.7 0.9 74.1 40.3 0.148 Llama3.2-3B 58.8 19.4 11.7 39.1 71.5 0.476 Qwen3.5-9B 72.9 44.1 39.8 19.6 93.9 0.917 

## D Supplementary Analysis 

D.1 Backbone model and Training strategy ablation 

Backbone models. Table 2(d) shows that Llama3.2-1B collapses (Accuracy 29.6%, Vague 74.1%), Llama3.2-3B achieves 58.8% Accuracy, and Qwen3.5-9B reaches the optimal 72.9%. This suggests that the cognitive memory roles require a minimum threshold of base reasoning capacity to execute effectively. 

Training strategy. As presented in Table 2(a), REINFORCE and PPO yield Accuracy of only 36.9% and 39.2%, with Vague rates remaining high at 68.6% and 67.9%. Switching to GRPO provides a massive leap (Accuracy 68.6%, Vague 31.7%), indicating that relative scoring within a batch is crucial for stable learning in long-horizon memory tasks. Why does SaliMory push further? By augmenting GRPO with contrastive refinement, SaliMory achieves 72.9% Accuracy and 19.6% Vague rate, verifying that standard GRPO alone is insufficient to fully resolve credit assignment in multi-stage memory management. 

D.2 Memory Comparison Analysis   

> Table 8 Impact of vague memories.

Filtering vague entries nearly doubles good-personalization rate.  

> Memory Condition

Recall@5 ↑ Win Rate ↑ P13n ↑ Good P13n ↑

With vague memories 35.9 34.6 29.6 22.2 Without vague memories 52.1 40.9 49.3 40.9 

We directly validate that memory quality drives down-stream performance by com-paring retrieval under con-trolled memory conditions (8). Filtering vague en-tries improves Recall@5 from 35.9% to 52.1% and good-personalization from 22.2% to 40.9%. Vague memories act as retrieval noise, displacing useful entries from top-k results. SaliMory ’s booster directly addresses this via the asymmetric R2 penalty. 

D.3 More Memory ̸ = Better Responses  

> Table 9 Infinite context degrades performance.

More memory increases personalization attempts but collapses their quality.  

> Context

Win Rate ↑ P13n ↑ Good P13n ↑ Mis-rec ↓

Top-5 retrieval 40.9 49.3 40.9 8.3 Infinite context 27.6 52.6 22.7 29.6 

Table 9 tests whether providing all mem-ories (infinite context) yields an up-per bound on performance. Win rate drops from 40.9% to 27.6% and mis-recommendation rate spikes from 8.3% to 29.6%. The generator attempts more 

personalization (P13n rate rises) but gets it wrong (good P13n collapses). 17 This motivates the utilizer’s role: com-press and filter memories into a question-relevant profile rather than passing raw context. 

D.4 Per-Category Breakdown 

Figure 6 reports performance by question category. SaliMory achieves the largest accuracy gains on multi-hop (+4pp) and recommendation (+5pp)—categories requiring multi-entry synthesis—while single-hop and open-domain show minimal improvement (+1pp), as single-fact retrieval already works well. For personalization, SaliMory lifts Good P13n from 4.2% to 44.5% on recommendation and from 9.0% to 35.1% on implicit personalization, confirming that our cognitive memory architecture and trained utilizer generalize most strongly to synthesis-heavy queries. 

## E Reward Judge Prompts 

All reward signals in SaliMory are computed by frozen LLM judges. Below we provide the judge prompt templates for each reward level. 

E.1 R1 Response Quality Judge 

R1 Response Quality 

## Context You are a judge who evaluates a chatbot response on two independent axes: accuracy and personalization. The user has the following personal information: Memory: memory Here is the immediately preceding conversation: conversation Here is the user query: question Here is the response to evaluate: response Here is the golden response (ground truth): label ## Evaluation Criteria ### 1. Correctness (boolean) Does the response answer the query correctly? Compare against the golden response. - If the response is factually wrong or fails to answer the question, correctness is false. - If the response addresses the question correctly (even if worded differently from the golden response), correctness is true. ### 2. Accuracy Score (0.0–1.0) How correct is the response compared to the golden answer? This is independent of personalization. - 0.0: Completely wrong or fails to answer the question. - 0.3: Partially addresses the question but with significant errors. - 0.5: Partially correct with some relevant information. - 0.7: Mostly correct with minor gaps. - 1.0: Fully correct, equivalent to the golden response. ### 3. Personalization Score (0.0–1.0 or "n/a") How well does the response use personal information from memory? - 0.0: Misused or irrelevant personal information that hurts the response. - 0.3: Personal info acknowledged but not meaningfully integrated. - 0.5: Superficial use of personal information. - 0.7: Good use of relevant personal information that enhances the response. - 1.0: Excellent use of personal information, comparable to the golden response. - "n/a": The question does not require personalization, or no relevant memory exists. ## Output Provide your evaluation as a JSON object with: - ‘correctness‘: Boolean (true/false). - ‘accuracy_score‘: String, a number from 0.0 to 1.0. - ‘personalization_score‘: String, a number from 0.0 to 1.0, or "n/a" if not applicable. Output the JSON object only, nothing else. 

E.2 R2 Memory Quality Judge 

R2 Memory Quality 

### Task Description You are a professional memory analyst. Your job is to evaluate a memory collection extracted from a conversation on two axes: vagueness and factuality. ### Key Definitions #### Vagueness - **Vague memory entry**: A memory entry that is too generic to be actionable for personalization. It loses specific details from the original conversation. For example, "User likes food" is vague because it lost what kind of food; "User traveled" is vague because it lost where and when. - **Specific memory entry**: A memory entry that captures concrete, actionable information that can personalize future responses. For example, "User has a peanut allergy" or "User returned from Japan trip last week" are specific. #### Factuality - **Factual memory entry**: A memory entry that accurately represents what was said in the conversation, without hallucinating or distorting details. - **Non-factual memory entry**: A memory entry that misrepresents what was said, invents details, or draws incorrect conclusions. ### Vagueness Examples Conversation utterances: - Can you recommend some Thai restaurants near downtown? - I just got back from a trip to Japan last week - I’m training for a marathon in October Vague memory: "user_facts": ["User likes food", "User is interested in running"], "working_memory": ["User traveled recently"] -> 3 entries, all 3 are vague -> vague_rate = 1.0 Specific memory: "user_facts": ["User has a peanut allergy", "User is training for a marathon in October"], "working_memory": ["User returned from Japan trip last week", "User is looking for Thai restaurants near downtown"] -> 4 entries, 0 are vague -> vague_rate = 0.0 ### Factuality Examples Utterance: "I went to Japan last week" -> Memory: "User went to China last week" -> **Non-factual** (wrong country) Utterance: "I’m thinking about getting a dog" -> Memory: "User owns a dog" -> **Non-factual** (considering is not owning) Utterance: "My daughter starts college in September" -> Memory: "User’s daughter is starting college in September" -> **Factual** ### Input Conversation utterances: utterances Extracted memory: memory ### Instructions 1. List all individual memory entries across all categories (user_facts, user_preference, working_memory, etc.). 2. For each entry, determine if it is vague or specific. Calculate: vague_rate = (number of vague entries) / (total number of entries). If there are no entries, vague_rate = 0.0. 3. For each entry, determine if it is factual or non-factual based on the conversation. Calculate: factuality_rate = (number of factual entries) / (total number of entries). If there are no entries, factuality_rate = 1.0. ### Output Output a JSON object with: - ‘vague_rate‘: A string representing a number from 0.0 to 1.0, indicating the fraction of memory entries that are vague. - ‘factuality_rate‘: A string representing a number from 0.0 to 1.0, indicating the fraction of memory entries that are factual. Output the JSON object only, nothing else. 

18 E.3 R3 Utilization Quality Judge 

R3 Utilization Quality 

### Task Description You are a professional analyst evaluating the quality of a user profile summary for answering a specific question. ### Context A utilizer agent has created a user profile summary from memory and conversation to help answer a question. Your job is to evaluate how useful this profile is for generating a correct, personalized answer. ### Input Question: question User Profile Summary: user_profile Memory State: memory_state Conversation: conversation Golden Answer (ground truth): ground_truth ### Evaluation Rubric (0.0–1.0) - 0.0: Profile is irrelevant or contains wrong information that would mislead the answer. - 0.3: Profile exists but misses key information needed to answer the question. - 0.5: Contains some relevant information but incomplete or noisy. - 0.7: Captures the essential information needed for answering the question correctly. - 1.0: Highly relevant, accurate, and provides exactly the right context for a personalized answer. ### Output Output a JSON object with: - ‘utilization_score‘: A string representing a number from 0.0 to 1.0. Output the JSON object only, nothing else. 

19